---
layout: creative
title: Hands of Chance
summary: Interactive fiction-based immersive game experience—how the stories we choose to listen to affect or determine our personal realities.
image: /creative/handsofchance-board_450x300.jpg
---

With practically no constraints but a firm three-month timeline, an intrepid group of three of us in the New Media Interactive Design course embarked on an ambitious project: a game-like experience for participants, based around a series of themed stories (Love, War, Success, Fate) developed using <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interactive_fiction" target="_blank">interactive fiction</a>.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-install_600x660.jpg" description="The computers in the lab were split up into stations for each of the four themes." %}

## Overview

Our team of three, after extensive brainstorming in-person and via a shared Google Doc, decided upon the conceptual theme "how the stories we choose to listen create our personal reality," or "how our choices determine our stories, and (vice versa) how our developed personal narratives determine our choices".

The project was an interactive experience that exposes to the audience how the choices they have in life are determined and limited, not just by circumstance but by the stories they choose to listen to—stories told by their friends, family, the media, teachers, bosses and neighbors. These sets of filtered stories and choices create our individual mediated realities.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-board_700x510.jpg" description="Participants take a place at our 'game board', where they are dealt a set of cards and have to roll a die to determine whether they will follow the path of Love, War, Success, or Fate." %}

## Gameplay

During the installation, each participant is dealt 4-6 cards at random (out of a deck of 24). Each card has a word describing a personality trait (empathy, rage, honesty) and a corresponding icon. The participant is then escorted by a team member to a computer station and chooses one of four themes displayed on the screen: love, war, success or fate. This begins the story at one of four starting points (scenarios).

{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-cards_960x560.jpg" description="The visual designer on our team created completely original iconography associated with our four themes.  She designed and printed 'trait cards' associated with these 24 unique icons." %}

Interactive fiction takes the player through a story, prompting for commands from the player to determine the course of the plot. In our version, at each command prompt point, the participant is presented with four icons, one or more of which will match an icon on his cards. He will then enter the word on the matching card (or choose one if he has multiple matching cards), which will determine the way his "character" behaves at that point. Each scenario will have several potential outcomes depending on these actions, each embodying an aspect of the theme being explored.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-war_960x470.png" description="Each of the four themes featured a unique 'choose-your-own-adventure' story." %}

After completing one of the four scenarios, the program outputs a number and a unique phrase, which the participant is instructed to write down on a provided blank notecard. She takes the notecard to a table near the back of the room, where one of our team members asks for her card and presents her with a choice of two stickers (out of a set of 24) depending on what her notecard says. The participant is instructed to wear the sticker, which tells the story she played and something about the outcome reached.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-stickers-cards_960x270.jpg" description="Depending on which story ending participants reached, they were assigned a sticker to wear as a 'badge of honor' (or dishonor) after finishing the game." %}

## Technical

The <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interactive_fiction" target="_blank">interactive fiction</a> (IF) platform provided the potential for gradually revealing this idea to individual participants. As the “story” unfolds based on the decisions of the participant (mediated by the limitations placed on her choices by the cards she has been dealt), the consequences of the choices the participant makes become more apparent, as well as the subtle interconnectedness of the various scenarios.

We used the popular Interactive Fiction software <a href="http://inform7.com/" target="_blank">Inform7</a> in conjunction with Parchment, a web-based IF interpreter that allows integration with HTML and CSS. For web-based interactivity, we created a customized layout with HTML5, CSS3 and JavaScript. Original graphics were created for the icons, cards and stickers.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-inform_960x440.png" extraClasses="hidden-sm" description="The Inform7 interactive fiction platform was a challenging but really fascinating tool to craft conditional storylines." %}
{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-inform1_800x730.png" extraClasses="hidden-md" %}
{% include project-image.html file="creative/handsofchance-inform2_800x730.png" extraClasses="hidden-md" description="The Inform7 interactive fiction platform was a challenging but really fascinating tool to craft conditional storylines." %}