---
layout: creative
title: SpectraView
summary: Web application for interpreting, graphing, and sharing Mössbauer spectroscopy data.
image: /creative/spectraview-interface_450x300.png
---

I was on a team of three computer science/new media students data-driven web application to interpret, graph and share Mössbauer spectroscopy data for a chemistry research scientist at UNC Asheville who is part of a community of a few thousand scientists working in the field.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/spectraview-interface_960x635.png" description="This short project (only three months) resulted with a functional prototype—it would have been great to work more iteratively on the app, integrating feedback from our expert user/advisor along the way." %}

## Overview

<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%B6ssbauer_spectroscopy" target="_blank">Mössbauer spectroscopy</a> requires analysis of large multivariate datasets, and the motivation for this project was the need for a more dynamic and interactive and standardized means of handling and interpreting this data, as well as to provide a platform for the scientists to share the data among their colleagues.

Our team designed and developed a prototype web application to accept a variety of raw incoming data formats, interpret and convert them into a standard format and generate interactive graphs. 

Along with our goal to enable the spectroscopy community to analyze, compare and share the data, we made sure to utilize well-documented, open-source platforms—such as the JavaScript graphing library <a href="http://multigraph.github.io/" target="_blank">Multigraph</a> and the collaborative code-sharing platform Github—to encourage future teams of developers and scientists to download our source code and customize it according to their needs.

## Collaboration

Our team of three undergraduate seniors, all with backgrounds in both New Media and Computer Science, were tasked with the responsibility of determining a solution for our client's problem based on our collective skills and accessible tools.

Our individual areas of expertise were conveniently complementary, as we had one team member experienced with server management and back-end engineering with Python; one well-versed in front-end design and development; and the other (myself) focused on dynamic integration of the two.

My responsibilities in this project included designing and implementing a suitable database, as well as developing the scripts to dynamically integrate this database with the user interface.  I also worked with our UI designer on the web application interface.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/spectraview-db-tech_960x350.png" description="At the time, I was taking a couple parallel courses on database design, so along with working collaboratively on the interface with the UI designer, I designed and built the table structure to manage the data.  Our tech stack included PHP, MySQL, AWS, and Python." %}

### Code-sharing and version control

<a href="https://github.com/mvemjsunp/openSpectra" target="_blank">SpectraView on Github</a> (formerly OpenSpectra)

The well-known collaborative coding and version control platform Github was essential to our development process. We had all used Github before, but not quite as extensively as this project demanded. As all three of us were writing code on many of the same files, sometimes working simultaneously from different locations, Github allowed us to always have access to the most recent changes by team members, as well as to easily revert back to previous versions of files in case someone contributed faulty code.

This also supported the mutual goal of our team and our client for the project to be scalable and extensible, since Github would host our application prototype persistently as an open-source project for other developers to view, download and adapt to their needs.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/spectraview-github-code_960x390.png" extraClasses="hidden-sm" description="Because three of us were collaborating simultaneously, often on the same files, using Git to manage and share our codebase was crucial." %}
{% include project-image.html file="creative/spectraview-github_750x630.png" extraClasses="hidden-md" %}
{% include project-image.html file="creative/spectraview-php_800x640.png" extraClasses="hidden-md" description="Because three of us were collaborating simultaneously, often on the same files, using Git to manage and share our codebase was crucial." %}

## UI design and front-end development

We wanted to encourage users to not only share and retrieve spectroscopy datasets, but also to use SpectraView as a platform for manipulating and interacting with the data. The data ‘viewport’ evolved into a ‘workspace’ with components for storing, browsing, notating and visualizing datasets.

With the greater scientific community in mind, we brainstormed useful features and organizational components for the application. The interface was designed with our expert user/mentor's input to identify the necessary features like browsing, uploading, and zooming. The ultimate UI goal was a responsive, clean, clutter-free design that belies the quantity of data underlying the display. 

We were inspired by information visualization guru Edward Tufte, who said “[…] confusion and clutter are failures of design, not attributes of information. And so the point is to find design strategies that reveal detail and complexity—rather than fault the data for an excess or complication.

We used Twitter Bootstrap to quickly ramp up our layout into something tenable, since we had plenty of technical hurdles to overcome.

{% include project-image.html file="creative/spectraview-ui-prototype_960x520.png" description="The prototype UI design ended up a bit rougher than our mockups due to the tight timeframe.  We focused more on getting the prototype into a functional state." %}

## Results

As this was a research project, after three months, we successfully developed a functional proof-of-concept for a web application capable of storing, standardizing, visualizing, organizing and sharing multivariate spectroscopy data uploaded in a range of different formats. 

We encountered some issues when our expert user/adviser started exploring the graphing plugin we selected when our prototype was ready for him to test.  He was concerned with the adequacy of Multigraph’s default functionality to scale, pan, and zoom on graphs, which would be critical for the highly specific calculations and measurements involved in spectroscopy.

This revelation made it very clear that creating a prototype and getting early feedback from users is critical to the success and ultimate adoption of any product—although we should have tried to get that feedback even earlier, before we had invested so much time in our tools of choice.  It was a hard lesson to learn toward the end of our project, but one that will definitely stick with all three of us in future endeavors.